Welcome back everyone to this lecture on the cast operator and cast function the cast operator lets
you convert from one data type into another.
So for example you can convert a string into an integer.
Now the important thing to keep in mind here is that not every instance of a data type can be cast into
any other data type.
It must be reasonable to actually convert that data.
Now that term what is reasonable is usually pretty self-explanatory given the situation.
So for example if you have a string entry of the digit five and you want to cast that to an integer
that makes sense it's quite obvious that that string 5 or that digit 5 will then be converted into the
integer 5.
However if you have something more complex like the actual string spelling out five F. Ivey sequel is
not going to be able to read that string.
Understand that English and then convert it back to a digit integer.
So as you practice more and more sequel it should become pretty obvious what can be cast into what both.
Just keep that in mind.
It must be reasonable to convert that data.
And if you're thinking of using the cast function you have already most likely done that calculation
already in your head.
So there are two main ways to actually perform a cast operation and that is through the cast function
which is just general circle syntax and post sequel has a specialized cast operator which is just essentially
a shorthand for a cast function call.
Let's walk through first the original cast function call the top one.
Here we can see that we're simply saying select.
And then within the cast function we're going to do is passing the thing we want to convert or cast
then say as.
And then the data type we want to cast that too.
So here I am saying cast that string five as an integer the cast operator is essentially shorthand for
this instead of having to write the cast function and the ASCII word since you're always going to be
having to write that for a cast function Postgres sequel itself has this specialized operator which
is just using two colons.
So you're basically saying select and then the string five colon colon to integer.
Now keep in mind that typically you're not doing this on a single sample or single instance.
Instead you're going to be using this within a select query of a column name instead of a single instance.
So for example if you had a table that for some reason the date column was set up as a string entry
then what you can do is say select cast the date column there as timestamp from table.
Let's go ahead and explore some examples in P.G. ataman.
All right.
Here I am inside of P.G. ataman.
Let's first show you the actual syntax calls of single instances of casting before we run it on a column.
So there's again two ways of doing this.
I'm going to say select and then I can call cast and what I'm going to do here is attempt to cast the
string five as the integer data type.
And notice here that the highlighting within PGI admin lets me know that I'm using the correct keywords
so I run this.
And note now I get five back.
But now it's an integer.
And if I really wanted to I could add in an alias call to call this new result column whatever I wanted
such as new int for a new integer.
Now as I mentioned there must be reasonable to actually cast this.
So for some reason you had the string five you're trying to cast that as an integer.
Let's go ahead and see what happens when we try to run this.
Notice that Postgres sequel if it's not able to do it it's simply going to report back that you have
an invalid input syntax.
So if that happens to be the case there's really nothing you can do as far as the cast function call
what you really need to be doing is making sure that either the thing you're trying to convert is reasonable
or if you had selected the correct data type.
Now as I previously mentioned there is actually specialized Postgres sequel operators to essentially
perform shorthand for this sort of conversion.
Something to keep in mind is this is only available in the post Kress sequel engine.
It's not available in a lot of other sequel engines.
So we're going to do here is basically remove that say the string five colon colon and then the data
type we want to convert it to such as integer and note here that's going to produce back the exact same
result.
So let's try another number such as 10 run that again.
And as I mentioned before if you're doing something that doesn't make sense for sequel you try to run
that it's simply going to report back an invalid input syntax.
OK OK.
So finally let's go ahead and explore an example use case of the cast function on a real table from
our database.
I'm going to select everything from the rental database run that and I can see here.
I have lots of different ideas like an inventory I.D. customer I.D. staff I.D. and so on.
Let's imagine for some reason I want to figure out the actual character the length of the inventory
I.D. essentially asking the question how many digits are within each inventory I.D..
So that's a little troublesome to do as an integer.
There is no real way I can easily count the number of digits within this integer using mathematics.
However it's really easy to do with a string.
I can simply ask for the character length of the string and if I check out the documentation for string
functions and operators I know that there's a character length string right here.
So character underscore length.
So let's go ahead and try that out.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to have the first cast this inventory I.D. as a variable character
so once a variable character let's go ahead and run this make sure that works.
I can see that it looks the same.
However it's no longer an integer.
It's character varying which then means I can say what's the character underscore length of this result
run that.
And now it works.
That is now it's returning back an integer counting how many actual characters or digits or in each
inventory I.D..
So that is a use case of why you may want to be using cast in order to convert data types because you
know that for certain data types there's useful functions.
If you try to just run this character length on inventory I.D. by itself and run that note what happens.
It's going to say that there's no function that matches the given name and argument type.
Essentially telling you you may need to add explicit type cast which is exactly what we did earlier.
OK that's it.
I'll see you at the next lecture.